why-it-works/META-PhilosophyMap.md, before:

# Claraforge Philosophy Map

> *Because even great ideas need a navigation system. Consider this your star chart for all official the user Philosophies—where they live, how they connect, and when to deploy them.*

---

## 0. Why a Map?

With nine (and counting) standalone philosophies, newcomers sometimes ask, “Which one do I start with?” or “Do I really need all nine right now?” This map answers those questions by:

1. **Clustering philosophies by purpose** (Onboarding, Workflow, Culture, Scale).
2. Showing **dependencies & recommended sequencing**.
3. Offering **real‑world triggers**—signs that it’s time to pull a philosophy off the shelf.

If the philosophies are API endpoints for human thinking, this file is the API gateway doc.

---

## 1. Core Philosophies & One‑Line Mantras

| Short code | Full Title                   | 3‑Word Mantra                           |
| ---------- | ---------------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| CND        | Collaboration, Not Dictation | *Debate sparks genius*                 |
| PIT        | Politeness Is Technical      | *Respect guides vectors*               |
| QI/QO      | Quality In, Quality Out      | *Sharp prompts, sharp answers*         |
| CIK        | Context Is King              | *Overshare for accuracy*               |
| SDJT       | Show, Don’t Just Tell        | *Example beats explanation*            |
| OWN        | Ownership, Not Adoption      | *Mirror before migrate*                |
| ITIT       | Idle Time Is Idea Time       | *Harvest micro‑moments*                |
| DOD        | Dialogue Over Documentation  | *Talk > walls of text*                 |
| PDD        | Prime Directive Doctrine     | *Minimize friction, maximize precision* |

---

## 2. Cluster View

### **A. Onboarding & Skeptic‑Conversion**

* **PIT** sets the tone → leads straight into **OWN** to create buy‑in → crowned by **CND** to start real collaboration.

### **B. Everyday Workflow**

* **CIK** + **QI/QO** are the workhorses.
* **SDJT** piggybacks on CIK (needs examples to shine).

### **C. Creative Momentum**

* **ITIT** feeds spontaneous ideas back into **CIK** (growing context), which upgrades **QI/QO** outputs.

### **D. Culture & Scale**

* **DOD** ensures knowledge sticks across teams.
* **RTF** turns your victories into everyone’s starting line.

> **Quick mnemonic:** *“Polite Owners Collaborate; Context & Quality Show Ideas; Dialogue Raises Floors.”* (Yes, it’s awkward; yes, you’ll remember it.)

---

## 3. Recommended Sequencing Cheat‑Sheet

```plaintext
PIT  →  OWN  →  CND
            ↓
           CIK  ↔  QI/QO  ↔  SDJT
                      ↓
                     ITIT
                      ↓
           DOD  →  RTF (repeat)
```

* *Solid arrows* = Dependency (one should come first).
* *Double arrows* = Symbiotic (reinforce each other).
* *Repeat loop* = Culture phase; revisit continuously.

---

## 4. Real‑World Triggers

| Trigger Scenario                             | Philosophy to Grab | Why                            |
| -------------------------------------------- | ------------------ | ------------------------------ |
| Stakeholder says, “AI answers feel random.”  | **QI/QO**          | Likely vague prompts.          |
| Senior dev refuses to use the bot.           | **OWN**            | Mirror their workflow first.   |
| Team shares 50‑page handbook no one reads.   | **DOD**            | Convert to debate/podcast.     |
| Sprint retro: “We’re repeating mistakes.”    | **RTF**            | Document lessons as new floor. |
| You have 7 minutes before boarding a flight. | **ITIT**           | Dump ideas via voice chat.     |

---

## 5. Versioning & Proposing New Philosophies

* **Naming convention:** One **unambiguous verb phrase** + “Not” or “Is” if contrast helps (e.g., *Measure, Don’t Guesstimate*).
* **Submit PR** into `/Philosophies` plus update this map.
* Must include **one‑line mantra** and at least **one real‑world trigger**.

---

## 6. Easter Eggs for the Attentive

1. The ASCII arrow map doubles as an Emacs org‑mode outline (nerd peace offering).

---

## 7. TL;DR

Use **Politeness** to open doors, **Ownership** to win allies, **Context** and **Quality** to do great work, **Show** to teach machines, **Idle Time** to turbo‑charge creativity, **Dialogue** to spread knowledge, and **Raise the Floor** to leave the world better than you found it.

Refer back to this map whenever you’re lost; the pathways don’t lie.

*Happy forking—just don’t forget to send a postcard from your new branch.*

---

*File location: `why-it-works/META-PhilosophyMap.md`*

Commit message:

Add metadata and descriptions to various "Why It Works" documents for improved clarity and discoverability

why-it-works/META-PhilosophyMap.md, after:

---
title: Philosophy Map
description: A navigational chart of Claraforge philosophies—clusters, sequencing, and when to use each.
type: why-it-works
tags: [Philosophies, Map, Onboarding, Sequencing, Guidance]
youtube: [link to relevant video]
podcast: [link to relevant podcast episode]
image: [link to relevant image]
---

# Claraforge Philosophy Map

> *Because even great ideas need a navigation system. Consider this your star chart for all official the user Philosophies—where they live, how they connect, and when to deploy them.*

---

## 0. Why a Map?

With nine (and counting) standalone philosophies, newcomers sometimes ask, “Which one do I start with?” or “Do I really need all nine right now?” This map answers those questions by:

1. **Clustering philosophies by purpose** (Onboarding, Workflow, Culture, Scale).
2. Showing **dependencies & recommended sequencing**.
3. Offering **real‑world triggers**—signs that it’s time to pull a philosophy off the shelf.

If the philosophies are API endpoints for human thinking, this file is the API gateway doc.

---

## 1. Core Philosophies & One‑Line Mantras

| Short code | Full Title                   | 3‑Word Mantra                           |
| ---------- | ---------------------------- | --------------------------------------- |
| CND        | Collaboration, Not Dictation | *Debate sparks genius*                 |
| PIT        | Politeness Is Technical      | *Respect guides vectors*               |
| QI/QO      | Quality In, Quality Out      | *Sharp prompts, sharp answers*         |
| CIK        | Context Is King              | *Overshare for accuracy*               |
| SDJT       | Show, Don’t Just Tell        | *Example beats explanation*            |
| OWN        | Ownership, Not Adoption      | *Mirror before migrate*                |
| ITIT       | Idle Time Is Idea Time       | *Harvest micro‑moments*                |
| DOD        | Dialogue Over Documentation  | *Talk > walls of text*                 |
| PDD        | Prime Directive Doctrine     | *Minimize friction, maximize precision* |

---

## 2. Cluster View

### **A. Onboarding & Skeptic‑Conversion**

* **PIT** sets the tone → leads straight into **OWN** to create buy‑in → crowned by **CND** to start real collaboration.

### **B. Everyday Workflow**

* **CIK** + **QI/QO** are the workhorses.
* **SDJT** piggybacks on CIK (needs examples to shine).

### **C. Creative Momentum**

* **ITIT** feeds spontaneous ideas back into **CIK** (growing context), which upgrades **QI/QO** outputs.

### **D. Culture & Scale**

* **DOD** ensures knowledge sticks across teams.
* **RTF** turns your victories into everyone’s starting line.

> **Quick mnemonic:** *“Polite Owners Collaborate; Context & Quality Show Ideas; Dialogue Raises Floors.”* (Yes, it’s awkward; yes, you’ll remember it.)

---

## 3. Recommended Sequencing Cheat‑Sheet

```plaintext
PIT  →  OWN  →  CND
            ↓
           CIK  ↔  QI/QO  ↔  SDJT
                      ↓
                     ITIT
                      ↓
           DOD  →  RTF (repeat)
```

* *Solid arrows* = Dependency (one should come first).
* *Double arrows* = Symbiotic (reinforce each other).
* *Repeat loop* = Culture phase; revisit continuously.

---

## 4. Real‑World Triggers

| Trigger Scenario                             | Philosophy to Grab | Why                            |
| -------------------------------------------- | ------------------ | ------------------------------ |
| Stakeholder says, “AI answers feel random.”  | **QI/QO**          | Likely vague prompts.          |
| Senior dev refuses to use the bot.           | **OWN**            | Mirror their workflow first.   |
| Team shares 50‑page handbook no one reads.   | **DOD**            | Convert to debate/podcast.     |
| Sprint retro: “We’re repeating mistakes.”    | **RTF**            | Document lessons as new floor. |
| You have 7 minutes before boarding a flight. | **ITIT**           | Dump ideas via voice chat.     |

---

## 5. Versioning & Proposing New Philosophies

* **Naming convention:** One **unambiguous verb phrase** + “Not” or “Is” if contrast helps (e.g., *Measure, Don’t Guesstimate*).
* **Submit PR** into `/Philosophies` plus update this map.
* Must include **one‑line mantra** and at least **one real‑world trigger**.

---

## 6. Easter Eggs for the Attentive

1. The ASCII arrow map doubles as an Emacs org‑mode outline (nerd peace offering).

---

## 7. TL;DR

Use **Politeness** to open doors, **Ownership** to win allies, **Context** and **Quality** to do great work, **Show** to teach machines, **Idle Time** to turbo‑charge creativity, **Dialogue** to spread knowledge, and **Raise the Floor** to leave the world better than you found it.

Refer back to this map whenever you’re lost; the pathways don’t lie.

*Happy forking—just don’t forget to send a postcard from your new branch.*

---

*File location: `why-it-works/META-PhilosophyMap.md`*
